All right, welcome back. Now the next
37th verse.
to dispel the suffering of infinite
beings with superior wisdom free from
the three concepts dedicating the merit.
Accumulated through these effort efforts
to enlightenment is the practice of
bodhicattas.
So
the point here is that these 37
points of practice
do not
come naturally to us. Right? Without
without mindfulness and awareness,
we will not be able to do this this 37
practices.
Um,
the nature of
of our being tends to manifest in
negative actions due to our habits.
The only way to transform these habits
is to
engage in this these 37 practice
with effort and diligence.
If we
succeed in developing our
virtuous attitude through practice,
what should we do with this virtue?
The answer is here
to use it to help remove the suffering
of all beings.
This means that any virtue or any merit
we accumulated
should always be dedicated to others
including of course ourselves.
If you share the merit of your practice
or positive actions with all beings
mentally, right, that merit will last
until you according to Mahayana Buddhi
teaching
uh that merit will last until you reach
enlightenment. It's just like uh they
say in the sutras they say just like a
drop of water that you put into the
ocean that will never dry up for as long
as the ocean remain.
It's also important to dedicate your
marriage to the
uh the right goal.
So your dedication
must
to to be pure.
Uh but um when we have a good motivation
then no question your dedication will be
very pure.
And when we make this dedication,
it should be done without any uh
clinging to our own personal benefit or
um you know and without
attachment.
That's why it says here with spur your
wisdom free free of concepts of the
three-fold three-fold purity.
Do you understand that the threefold
periods of dedication refers to the
uh to the
absence of inherent existence
and three aspects
same thing the person the three the it's
a three-fold period
uh three-fold period the person who
dedicates
Right. The person who
receives the dedication
and um dedicated merit
um this is called
in Mahayana
three-fold purity.
All are empty of inherent existence.
And this understanding is the wisdom
that relies emptiness.
It is quite difficult to
comprehend how to dedicate merit in this
way
if you are sort of
not familiar with practice emptiness.
So how then should we
as ordinary beings dedicate the merit?
We can do it by following
and the footsteps of those who have that
realization
and that is we should start by thinking
about all the virtuous things we have
done and we should also think about all
the virtuous activities of all the
Buddhas
bodhic sattvas
then this is important for us
cuz the the first one um free of concept
the three-fold period it's really hard
for us but this one is uh easy
so we think about our virtuous things we
have done think about all the Buddhas
bodhis activities virtues of that that
their virtues then we bring all that
together in union so to
and then say I will dedicate all them
and the same way the Buddhas and Bodhis
dedicate their merit
that's how should you dedicate merit and
then Mahayana Buddhis say if you do that
that's
almost same as this the dedicate um
the three-fold purity you know that's
bas based on realization, emptiness and
nature mind. If you have no capacity
dedicate that way, then we should do the
the next the second one. Then that's
that's how we should dedicate merit.
So we finished the 37 practice of bodhic
sattas. Now we have the
concluding kind of verses.
And first we have how and
for whom this text was composed and the
purpose in composition this text
that is it says
it says relying on what is taught in the
sutras tantras and the teachings of the
great Masters I have composed this 37
bodhic satta practice for the benefit of
those who wish to train on the bodhic
satta's part. The point of this
concluding verse made by
uh what do you call
is that he did not make up any of these
verses.
It comes from a pure
source. And this pure source comes from
two different sources. Okay? The
teachings of the Buddha and the
commentaries
that made by the great masters.
The teachings of the Buddha can be as
you know divided into the sutras and
tantras. Right?
The sutras
mostly focus on wisdom, compassion
and the nature of uh reality
and the tantras refers to bajana
teachings which often involves special
practices like daily you know
visualization and mantra restrations
right. So
also
based this teaching on the commentaries
of
realized the teachers who have
walked the path before him.
So to write an authentic teaching
tradition requires that the author to
possess at least one of three uh
qualifications.
At best the author should have fully
realized the na uh the ultimate nature.
If not
then the author should have been uh
blessed by a direct vision of their yam
deities.
Okay, that's second. And uh at least the
author must have thoroughly studied the
Buddhist teachings and uh possess
perfect knowledge.
None of this
the the someone who write the teachings
whatever
none of these three qualities
without these three qualities you are
not uh your your teaching is not
authentic
you should not practice this that
teaching
so much to
possessed all this the qualifications.
He had immensed you know immense
knowledge and was also blessed with uh
numerous visions of you know wisdom
deities.
So this 37 practice of bodhic satta is
the most direct and profound mahayana
teachings.
So Mitome is offering here
a very you know practical guide and
clear instructions
with this 37 practice
and also here he is summarizing you know
how a bodhic sattva
behaves
thinks and practices
uh in everyday life All right. So this
teaching is a summary of the essential
points of the sutras, tantras and
commentaries.
Um
those are from Buddhas, bodhic sattvas
or great masters. U so it's without any
mistakes
you can you can trust this teaching.
It says for the benefit of those who
wish to train on the bodhic sattas. This
verse demonstrates
his pure motivation which means right
his motivation was um an expression of
compassion in bodhicitta. He composed
this text not out the desire to become a
famous or anything else but in order to
make the teaching available to
practitioners Mayana practitioners who
really wish to practice Mayana Buddhism.
So this verse summarize the vast number
of bodhic sattva practices into
a manageable
37 practice to benefit those who have
entered the mahayana part
to
has made the practice easy for everyone
to apply.
That's why these teachings have been
able to
help many Buddhist practitioners
throughout centuries.
So the teachings
you must need
are teaching that genuinely bring
benefit right and inspiration to your
practice. So through such teaching you
can develop
more and more bodhicitta
both you know relative and ultimate
bodhicitta
and then
you can go beyond this human being what
do you call it let go of this ordinary
uh worldly concerns
Um
and also develop the relative bodhic
jeta, the determination to achieve
enlightenment in order to be able to
benefit all beings. And that will lead
to you to ultimate bodhicitta, the
realization of the ultimate primordial
wisdom, the nature mind.
That is Buddhist quote in Latin. So
bodhicitta opens door to whatever
practice you do
so important.
Um so that's the how Mito composed this
text and his motivation it shows here
right now the next verse M
showed his sort of humble attitude it
says
it says because of my poor for
intelligence and literary education.
Uh
out of this text
will not delight scholars yet since they
are based on sutras and the teachings of
the great masters.
I think this practice of bodhic sattvas
are not mistaken.
So in this verse the author
was being very hol.
You can see that he truly sort of
tasures others and is not concerned with
his own reputation
when you read this history.
Even though he was a highly um realized
and learned master
but you know the great masters never
think proudly about what great learn or
realizations they possess. Um instead
they they hide their experience
qualities.
He doesn't say these teachings and you
know uh instructions are all my ideas
right he says all the words of wisdom
here come from the Buddhas and you know
the great masters the commentaries right
and he says here I have a poor
intelligence and lack of learn
and um you
Um he said I don't write things well so
I may have made some mistakes
but I tried
uh my best to rely on my teachers and um
the teachings they have given me you
know so as far as I understand what I
said here without mistakes that's what
he said right so studying this teaching
and reflecting upon it, meditating upon
it and teaching it
to others will not take anyone on the
wrong path. That's for sure. So this
teaching is um trustworthy.
Don't think this, you know, don't think
this guy has no self-confidence.
That was not the case.
So we can trust what he said.
And
um what you read in this text 37
practice bodhic satta
um
he's showing us the you know activities
of bodhic sattva
and in this teaching all the Buddhas in
bodhic sattvas
really all the you know sutras tantras
all these teachings are summarized in
this teaching.
And this is very meaningful and
beneficial.
So we should definitely
not waste our time
and as long as you are willing to listen
and can put the you know heart of
bodhicitta into your practice then
you know
I will take the responsibility to teach
you give you the
uh transmissions as I said
he wished you know I he said I want to
receive this 37 practice bodhic satta at
least 100 times that's what he said I
don't know how how many times he
received but I think a lot because this
teaching is the most important the you
know great masters consider this
teaching includes everything as as Mchi
himself said like this teaching is based
on the sutras tantras and the best
commentaries
and the summarized
everything Buddhas bodhic sattva's
teachings
so I'm very happy to have this
opportunity to give you this
transmission
um and in this way I have you know done
my responsibility and you can practice
the dharma
Um
in these days you can listen to
very important teachings you know online
and on the internet and which is very
very very helpful. Uh but it's very
different from sitting in a room with
your spiritual friends and teacher who
is speaking sort of poorly.
uh English and directly to you and
giving teachings to you directly from
authentic lineage. Uh it is not easy to
have this opportunity believe me it's
very precious. Um
anyway now the next verse which
really sort of he confess any mistakes
he may have made and asked forgiveness.
It says
so it says however it is hard for
someone unintelligent like me
or he he's talking about himself right
and to fathom a great ves of the bodhic
sattas activities so I'm asking the
forgiveness of holy beings for all my
mistakes such as contradictions and
irrelevant
verses and so forth. God bless. Okay. In
this verse
was being very humble again, right? This
is this is um this is a beautiful and
humble sort of statement.
You often found at the beginning and and
and
end of the teaching
this humble you know the great masters
always say that right
um so he's saying that uh the bodhic
sattva's um compassionate actions are
profound and vast
um even though this teaching um relies
is on his teachers and the teachings
from the Buddhas. Um but he's still it
is difficult to understand
um for one with small
intelligence like himself.
So he's basically saying there might be
a mistakes such as you know
contradiction.
Um so it says I'm asking the forgiveness
of the holy beings.
So this is an act of confession right
and pervocation.
So he's aware that uh in trying to
explain or engage with such deep topics
mystics are inevitable.
So he sincerely request
uh forgiveness from the holy beings
which is uh the the Buddhas,
bodhicattas, his his teachers. Okay.
And then now we have the last verse
which is dedication. Okay.
It says by virtue of this merit gathered
here by the power of the relative in
ultimate body may all sentient beings
become like the lord of avaloges
who is beyond the extremes of sam
samsara and nirvana for the benefit of
self and others. This was written by
Tome a teacher of scripture and logic at
rin cave
done.
So this is beautiful dedication verse
with a deep meaning.
The generally speaking you know Buddhist
text always um
end with dedication of merit.
Um
it reminds practitioners that all the
virtues they accumulate through their
dharma practice is for the benefit of
others.
So that's why it says by virtue of this
mer gathered here uh this refers to this
practice teaching written by
so he dedicates whatever merit has been
gathered
uh and generate uh in composing this
text he wishes that all beings may
achieve enlightenment
and the main aspect operation of this
verse is that all beings become equal to
uh the p the practice of avalog that's
what I say right so it means equal in
aalog's limitless compassion and wisdom
so
wish all beings may achieve
level
so that they may benefit all beings just
as aalog Sh does. So it says by the
power of relative and ultimate
bodhicitta.
So through this teaching
wish that we all are able to generate
bodhicetta
and achieve liberation for the benefit
of all beings. So he dedicate all this
merit so that all beings develop both
relative and uh ultimate bodhicitta.
Um
so that's very important because in
order to use
our human life correctly and in order to
achieve enlightenment
uh within this life
we all have to dedicate ourselves to u
the genuine practice of the bodhicatta
path which is really beautiful part uh
no dangerous
This is the the best path. I think uh
Mahayana Hanayana uh path is beautiful
but um focus on themselves not so much
others and then the bajana is very
complicated
and mahayana the bodhic sappa path is
beautiful and easy and everybody can
journey on this path. So dedication
dedicate you know all sentient beings uh
so that we can um practice together and
journey on this Mahayana beautiful path.
Um so dedication must be done as part of
your practice compassion and care for
others.
Um
so I sincerely
wish this teaching will help everyone
uh to you know generate bodhicitta.
Um
even a small amount of practice you do
uh brings
tremendous benefit
because bodhic is so powerful.
So when you are going through difficult
times reflect on these teachings.
Um,
choose
whichever verse
that applies to your experience that
day, that situation,
and contemplate on it to transform your
mind.
Um I'm sure we all still far away and um
have some challenges and difficult
ahead right so at that point that
situation then we need this bodhic self
practice.
So if you practice with a motivation of
bodhicitta
your action will be beneficial
not only for yourself but all living
being. So if you practice dharma,
you should never give up
uh without expectation
but never give up from the beginning to
the end.
As as as Malaripa said, do not hope for
any result, but practice sincerely until
your death.
So everything is now in your hands.
You have everything you need to
practice.
Um
as it mentioned before in this text, all
the Buddha's teachings are summarized in
it. Right? Within your lifetime, you can
become a genuine bodhic satta if you
really want through this practice.
That's that. Um
uh now finally
I am
acknowledging that in hearing these
profound teachings
uh
same thing like Tommy said I don't think
he uh
made any mistakes but I may have made
mistakes for sure perhaps you know I
didn't give the teachings you were
hoping for
or I might have uh spoken in ways that
caused you know confusion or uh
misunderstanding.
Uh you can ask me and we can purify
that. But if that happened please
forgive me. Um and uh
uh thank you for your patience and uh
for your listening to this great uh
teachings. I'm very confident. One thing
is I have a really good transmission. Um
not just one time so many time I
received this teaching. So
um and I am certain that you have
uh generated a pure motivation. So I
rejoice in your great merit.
uh and um
uh let us generate profound gratitude
uh
to our teachers
to the Buddha's bodhic sattas especially
to bodhic satta you know to for this
vast and profound teaching
Um
I'm very grateful we have that this um
37 practice body sata teaching available
and and we dedicate it. So may all
sentient beings achieve enlightenment in
this very lifetime
at least generate bodhic jetta.
Um I think that's all I want to say and
oh another thing I would like to thank
you all for
sharing your spiritual life and thank
you for your support. Um I really have
um enjoyed giving this teaching
and
meditation practice with all of you. So
um thank you
and I also would like to deeply
um thank the the volunteers who have
put so much energy into this retreat.
And
um I also would like to thank um
especially those who have worked so hard
um taken care of this retreat
and uh Bodhija Sanga our board members
um thank you Jeremy
Rick here Colin Keith Kelly
um
and uh without you uh this
is impossible.
Uh so the from the bottom of my heart um
thank you so much. Um I also would like
to thank Mary really um continue to
help. I appreciate and um
uh without you it's impossible. It's
it's impossible for this uh
SA community to exist
and to make these teachings
available
and um
um I come from a very
distant place right and uh I'm only able
to teach the practice of the uh Um
the heart of bodhicitta here
uh because of you.
I mean it just not just saying.
So I really
from the bottom of my heart I thank you
so much and uh
um I appreciate all of you coming to
this retreat and listen to this um
profound teachings
that
come from real bodhic satta to
Um
and then also it's it's really I enjoy
it and doing this meditation together
here
and uh you know I hope um your practice
I really hope I will I will thank all of
you and say some prayers every day. Um I
hope your practice continue to grow and
uh also bring you a lot of happiness and
um meaningful benefit.
Anything else? That's all I want to say.
And now we're going to dedicate
merit um so that
uh this teaching meditation everything
be beneficial for all sentient beings.
So we're going to recite the uh
dedication chapter right here right now.